---
tags:
  - math_172
  - integrals
---

> An **improper integral** is the limit of an integral that has either
> 1. an infinite interval of integration, or
> $$ \int_0^\infty e^{-x} \, dx $$
> 2. an infinite discontinuity in the interval of integration.
> $$ \int_0^3 \frac{1}{\sqrt{3 - x}} \, dx $$

### Examples

> Evaluate $\displaystyle \int_0^\infty e^{-x} \, dx$.

```desmos-graph
left = 0; right = 4;
top = 2; bottom = 0;
---
f(x) = e^{-x}
```

Notice that the area from 0 to $b$ is bounded:

$\displaystyle \int e^{-x} \, dx = -e^{-t} + e^0 = 1 - \dfrac{1}{e^t}$

For any $t > 0$, this is less than 1.
As $t \to \infty$, $\dfrac{1}{e^t} \to 0$.

So,

$$ \int_0^\infty e^{-x} \, dx = \lim_{t \to \infty} \int_0^t e^{-x} \, dx $$

$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} [-e^{-x}]_0^t$
$= \displaystyle \lim{t \to \infty} (-e^{-t} - (-e^{-0}))$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} \left( 1 - \dfrac{1}{e^b} \right)$
$= 1$

This improper integral *converges* to 1.

Remember to keep the limit throughout the problem!

---

> Evaluate $\displaystyle \int_1^\infty \dfrac{1}{\sqrt{x}} \, dx$ or show that it diverges.

$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} \displaystyle \int_1^t x^{-\frac{1}{2}} \, dx$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} [2x^{\frac{1}{2}}]_1^b$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} (2 \sqrt{t} - 2)$
$= \infty$

This improper integral *diverges* to $\infty$.

---

> Evaluate $\displaystyle \int_1^\infty \dfrac{1}{x} \, dx$ or show that it diverges.

$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} \displaystyle \int_1^t \dfrac{1}{x} \, dx$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} [\ln |x|]1^t$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} (\ln t - \ln 1)$
$= \infty$

---

> Evaluate $\displaystyle \int_1^\infty \dfrac{1}{x^2} \, dx$ or show that it diverges.

$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} \displaystyle \int_1^t \dfrac{1}{x^2} \, dx$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} [-x^{-1}]_1^t$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} (-t^{-1} + 1^{-1})$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to \infty} \left( -\dfrac{1}{t} + 1 \right)$
$= 1$

---

> It turns out that
> $$ \int_1^\infty \frac{1}{x^p} \, dx $$
> - converges to $\dfrac{1}{p - 1}$ if $p > 1$, and
> - diverges otherwise.

---

> Evaluate $\displaystyle \int_0^3 \dfrac{1}{\sqrt{3 - x}} \, dx$ or show that it diverges.

$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to 3^-} \displaystyle \int_0^t \dfrac{1}{\sqrt{3 - x}} \, dx$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{t \to 3^-} \displaystyle \int_0^t (3 - x)^{-\frac{1}{2}} \, dx$

Let $u = 3 - x$
$du = -dx$

$= -\displaystyle \lim_{t \to 3^-} \left[ 2(3 - x)^{\frac{1}{2}} \right]_0^t$
$= -2 \displaystyle \lim_{t \to 3^-} \left[ \sqrt{3 - t} - \sqrt{3 - 0} \right]$
$= -2 \displaystyle \lim_{t \to 3^-} \left[ 0 - \sqrt{3} \right]$
$= 2 \sqrt{3}$

---

> Evaluate $\displaystyle \int_{-2}^3 \dfrac{1}{x^3} \, dx$ or show that it diverges.

$= \displaystyle \lim_{b \to 0^-} \displaystyle \int_{-2}^b x^{-3} \, dx + \lim_{c \to 0^+}  \displaystyle \int_c^3 x^{-3} \, dx$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{b \to 0^-} \left[ \dfrac{x^{-2}}{-2} \right]_{-2}^b + \displaystyle \lim_{c \to 0^+} \left[ \dfrac{x^{-2}}{-2} \right]_c^3$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{b \to 0^-} \left( -\dfrac{1}{2b^2} + \dfrac{1}{2(4)} \right) + \displaystyle \lim_{c \to 0^+} \left( -\dfrac{1}{2(9)} + \dfrac{1}{2c^2} \right)$
$= -\infty + \infty$

- Note: $-\infty + \infty \neq 0$

This integral *diverges*.

---

> Evaluate $\displaystyle \int_{-\infty}^\infty \dfrac{1}{x^2 + 1} \, dx$ or show that it diverges.

$= \displaystyle \int_{-\infty}^0 \dfrac{1}{x^2 + 1} \, dx + \displaystyle \int_0^\infty \dfrac{1}{x^2 + 1} \, dx$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{b \to -\infty} \displaystyle \int_b^0 \dfrac{1}{x^2 + 1} \, dx + \displaystyle \lim_{c \to \infty} \displaystyle \int_0^c \dfrac{1}{x^2 + 1} \, dx$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{b \to -\infty} [\tan^{-1} x]_b^0 + \displaystyle \lim_{c \to \infty} [\tan^{-1} x]_0^c$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{b \to -\infty} [\tan^{-1} 0 - \tan^{-1} b] + \displaystyle \lim_{c \to \infty} [\tan^{-1} 0 - \tan^{-1} c]$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{b \to -\infty} [-\tan^{-1} b] + \displaystyle \lim_{c \to \infty} [-\tan^{-1} c]$