---
tags:
  - math_172
---

> A sequence is a list of numbers written in some specific order:
> $$ 3, 6, 12, 24, \dots $$
> Notation:
> $$ \{a_n\}_{n = 1}^\infty = \{a_n\} = \{3, 6, 12, 24, \dots\} $$

We can write $\{a_n\} = \{3, 6, 12, 24, \dots\}$ implicitly as a **recurrence relation**:
$a_1 = 3$ and $a_{n + 1} = 2a_n$ for $n = 1, 2, 3, \dots$

Or, we can write $\{a_n\} = \{3, 6, 12, 24, \dots\}$ **explicitly**:
$a_n = 3 \times 2^{n - 1}$ for $n = 1, 2, 3, \dots$
$\{a_n\}_{n = 1}^\infty = \{3 \times 2^{n - 1}\}_{n = 1}^\infty$

## Limits of sequences

$a_n = 3 \times 2^{n - 1}$ for $n = 1, 2, 3, \dots$ diverges. Or, $\{3 \times 2^{n - 1}\}_{n = 1}^\infty$ diverges.

### Examples

> Find the first five terms of the sequence $\{(-1)^n\}_{n = 1}^\infty$ and determine if the sequence is convergent or divergent.

| $n$ | $a_n$ |
| --- | ----- |
| 1   | -1    |
| 2   | 1     |
| 3   | -1    |
| 4   | 1     |
| 5   | -1    |

The terms approach *no limit*. This sequence is divergent by **oscillation**.

---

> Find the first four terms of the sequence $a_n = \left\{ \dfrac{(-1)^n}{n^2} \right\}_{n = 1}^\infty$ and determine if the sequence is convergent or divergent.

| $n$ | $a_n$ |
| --- | ----- |
| 1   | -1    |
| 2   | 1/4   |
| 3   | -1/9  |
| 4   | 1/16  |

This sequence converges to 0 by oscillation.
The terms are **bounded** by -1 and 1/4.

---

## Infinite series

Consider the finite number $0.333333\dots = 0.\bar{3}$.

This can be written as a sum of infinitely many terms:
$S = 0.\bar{3} = 0.3 + 0.03 + 0.003 + 0.0003 + \dots$

If we stop at any point, that's a **partial sum**:
$S_1 = 0.3$
$S_2 = 0.3 + 0.03$
$S_3 = 0.3 + 0.03 + 0.003$

The $n$th partial sum $S_n$ is
$$ S_n = \sum_{k = 1}^n (3 \times 0.1^k) $$

---

The sum of the terms in a sequence of partial sums is an **infinite series**.

If the sequence of the partial sums has a limit $L$, the series converges to that limit $L$.

From our earlier sequence of partial sums $\sum_{k = 1}^n (3 \times 0.1^k)$,

$$ L = \lim_{n \to \infty} S_n = \lim_{n \to \infty} \sum_{k = 1}^n (3 \times 0.1^k) = \sum_{k = 1}^\infty (3 \times 0.1^k) = \frac{1}{3} $$

### Example

Consider the infinite series $\sum_{n = 1}^\infty \left( \dfrac{1}{2} \right)^n$.

> (a) Find the first 5 terms of the series.

| $n$ | $S_n$ |
| --- | ----- |
| 1   | 1/2   |
| 2   | 1/4   |
| 3   | 1/8   |
| 4   | 1/16  |
| 5   | 1/32  |

> (b) List the first 5 partial sums of the series.

---

> *Theorem 10.1: Limits of Sequences from Limits of Functions*
> Suppose $f$ is a function such that $f(n) = a_n$ for all positive integers $n$. If $\lim_{x \to \infty} f(x) = L$, then the limit of the sequence ${a_n}$ is also $L$, where $L$ may be $\pm \infty$.

### Examples

Find the limit or determine that it does not exist.

> (a) $\left\{ \dfrac{n^4}{n^5 + 1} \right\}$

$\displaystyle \lim_{x \to \infty} \dfrac{x^4}{x^5 + 1} = 0$

This sequence converges to 0.

> (b) $\left\{ \sin{\dfrac{n \pi}{2}} \right\}$

This sequence diverges by oscillation.

---

A sequence $\{a_n\}$ is **increasing** if $a_{n + 1} > a_n$ for all $n$.
- Example: $\{2, 4, 6, 8, \dots\}$

A sequence $\{a_n\}$ is **non-decreasing** if $a_{n + 1} \geq a_n$ for all $n$.
- Example: $\{2, 2, 4, 4, 6, 6, 8, 8, \dots\}$

A sequence is **monotonic** if it is non-increasing or non-decreasing.

A sequence $\{a_n\}$ is **bounded** if $|a_n| < B$ for all $n$ for some finite number $B$.

> Officially, a sequence $\{a_n\}$ is
> - **increasing** if $a_{n + 1} > a_n$
> - **decreasing** if $a_{n + 1} < a_n$
> - **monotonic** if it is non-increasing or non-decreasing
> - **bounded** if there is a number $M$ such that $|a_n| \leq M$ for $n = 1, 2, 3, \dots$

---

> (c) $\left\{ \dfrac{\sin{\frac{n \pi}{2}}}{n} \right\}$

$\{a_n\}$ is **not** monotonic.

However, $|a_n| \leq 1$ for all $n$ so $\{a_n\}$ is **bounded**.

This sequence converges to 0 by oscillation.

---

> *Theorem 10.3: Geometric Sequences*
> Let $r$ be a real number. Then,
> $$ \lim_{n \to \infty} r^n = \begin{cases} 0 & |r| < 1 \\ 1 & r = 1 \\ \text{does not exist} & r \leq -1 \text{ or } r > 1 \end{cases} $$
> If $r > 0$, then $\{r^n\}$ is a monotonic sequence. If $r < 0$, then $\{r^n\}$ oscillates.