---
tags:
  - math_172
  - series
---

Recall the finite number $0.333333 \dots = 0.\bar{3}$.

This can be written as a sum of infinitely many terms:
$0.\bar{3} = 0.3 + 0.03 + 0.003 + 0.0003 + \dots$

---

In general, a **geometric sum** with $n$ terms is:
$$ S_n = a + ar + ar^2 + \dots + ar^{n - 1} = \sum_{k = 0}^{n - 1} ar^k, $$
where $a \neq 0$ is the first term and the common multiple $r$ is the **ratio** of the series.

---

The sum of "all" of the terms in a sequence of partial sums is an **infinite series**.

If the sequence of the partial sums as a limit $L$, the series converges to that limit $L$.

> *Theorem 10.7: Geometric Series*
> Let $a \neq 0$ and $r$ be real numbers. If $|r| < 1$, then
> $$ \sum_{k = 0}^\infty ar^k = \dfrac{a}{1 - r}. $$
> If $|r| \geq 1$, then the series diverges.

### Examples

> Evaluate the geometric series
> $$ \sum_{k = 0}^\infty (0.3 \times 0.1^k) $$
> or state that it diverges.

The series converges, because $|r| < 1$.

$a = \frac{3}{10}$, $r = \frac{1}{10}$
$= \dfrac{a}{1 - r}$
$= \dfrac{\frac{3}{10}}{1 - \frac{1}{10}}$
$= \dfrac{\frac{3}{10}}{\frac{9}{10}}$
$= \dfrac{1}{3}$

---

> Evaluate the geometric series
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \left( -\frac{3}{5} \right)^{k - 1} $$
> or state that it diverges.

$a = 1$, $r = -\frac{3}{5}$
$= \dfrac{1}{1 - (-\frac{3}{5})}$
$= \dfrac{1}{\frac{8}{5}}$
$= \dfrac{5}{8}$

---

> Evaluate the geometric series
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \left( -\frac{5}{3} \right)^{k - 1} $$
> or state that it diverges.

This series diverges, since $|r| > 1$.

---

> Evaluate the geometric series
> $$ \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \left( 9^{-k + 1} 4^{k + 2} \right) $$
> or state that it diverges.

$= \displaystyle \sum_{k = 0}^\infty 9^{-k} 9^1 4^k 4^2$
$= 9 \cdot 4^2 \displaystyle \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \dfrac{4^k}{9^k}$
$= 144 \displaystyle \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \left( \dfrac{4}{9} \right)^k$

$a = 144$, $r = \frac{4}{9}$
$= \dfrac{144}{1 - \frac{4}{9}}$
$= \dfrac{144}{\frac{5}{9}}$
$= 144 \cdot \dfrac{9}{5}$
$= \dfrac{1296}{5}$

---

## Telescoping series

### Example

> Find a formula for the $n$th term of the sequence of partial sums for the telescoping series
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \left( \frac{1}{k} - \frac{1}{k + 1} \right). $$
> Then, evaluate $\displaystyle \lim_{n \to \infty} S_n$ to find the value of the series or state that it diverges.

$S_n = \displaystyle \sum_{k = 1}^n \left( \dfrac{1}{k} - \dfrac{1}{k + 1} \right)$

$$ = \frac{1}{1} - \dfrac{1}{2} + \dfrac{1}{2} - \dfrac{1}{3} + \dfrac{1}{3} - \dfrac{1}{4} + \dots - \dfrac{1}{n} + \dfrac{1}{n} - \dfrac{1}{n + 1} $$

$S_n = 1 - \dfrac{1}{n + 1}$

This series converges to 1.