---
tags:
  - math_172
  - integrals
---

> *Theorem 10.9: Divergence Test*
> If $\displaystyle \sum a_k$ converges, then $\displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} a_k = 0$. Equivalently, if $\displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} a_k \neq 0$, then the series diverges.

- Note: the Divergence Test can **NOT** be used to determine that a series is convergent

## Harmonic Sequence

$$ \left\{ \frac{1}{n} \right\} = \left\{ 1, \frac{1}{2}, \frac{1}{3}, \frac{1}{4}, \frac{1}{5}, \dots \right\} $$

These terms converge to zero, but the **Harmonic Series**
$$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \frac{1}{k} = 1 + \frac{1}{2} + \frac{1}{3} + \frac{1}{4} + \frac{1}{5} + \dots $$
is famously *divergent*.

### Example

> According to the Divergence Test, is the following series convergent, divergent, or is the Divergence Test inconclusive?
> $$ \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \frac{4k^2 - k^3}{10 + 2k^3} $$

This series diverges because the limit is -1/2.

---

> *Theorem 10.11: Integral Test*
> Suppose $f$ is a continuous, positive, decreasing function, for $x \geq 1$ and let $a_k = f(k)$ for $k = 1, 2, 3, \dots$. Then
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty a_k \text{ and } \int_1^\infty f(x) \, dx $$
> either both converge or both diverge. In the case of convergence, the value of the integral is *not* equal to the value of the series.

### Examples

> According to the Integral Test, is the following series convergent, divergent, or is the Integral Test inconclusive?
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \frac{1}{k^2} $$

Since the improper integral $\displaystyle \int_1^\infty \dfrac{1}{x^2} \, dx$ converges to 1, the series also converges.

> According to the Integral Test, is the following series convergent, divergent, or is the Integral Test inconclusive?
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \frac{1}{k} $$

Since the improper integral $\displaystyle \int_1^\infty \dfrac{1}{x} \, dx$ diverges, the series also diverges.

---

> *Theorem 10.12: Convergence of the $p$-series*
> The **$p$-series** $\displaystyle \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \dfrac{1}{k^p}$ converges for $p > 1$ and diverges for $p \leq 1$.