---
tags:
  - math_172
  - series
---

> *Theorem 10.14: Comparison Test (Direct Comparison Test)*
> Let $\sum a_k$ and $\sum b_k$ be series with positive terms.
> 1. If $a_k \leq b_k$ and $\sum b_k$ converges, then $\sum a_k$ converges.
> 2. If $b_k \leq a_k$ and $\sum b_k$ diverges, then $\sum a_k$ diverges.

- Note: two easily recognisable series to use for comparison:

$\displaystyle \sum_{p = 1}^\infty \dfrac{1}{k^p}$ (p-series) -> converges for $p > 1$
$\displaystyle \sum_{k = 0}^\infty ar^k$ (geometric series) -> converges for $|r| < 1$

### Example

> Is the following series convergent or divergent?
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \frac{k^2 + 2}{k^5 + 5} $$

- Note: $a_k > 0$ for $k \geq 1$

This series may behave like $\sum \dfrac{k^2}{k^4} = \sum \dfrac{1}{k^2}$, which is a convergent p-series.

We need to show that $\dfrac{k^2 + 2}{k^4 + 5} \leq \dfrac{k^2}{k^4}$ for $k \geq 1$.

$\dfrac{k^2 + 2}{k^4 + 5} < \dfrac{k^2 + 2}{k^4}$
$\dfrac{k^2 + 2}{k^4} = \dfrac{k^2}{k^4} + \dfrac{2}{k^4}$

Both $\dfrac{k^2}{k^4}$ and $\dfrac{2}{k^4}$ are convergent p-series, so $\dfrac{k^2 + 2}{k^4}$ also converges (sum of convergent series).

Therefore, the given series converges by the Direct Comparison Test.

---

> Is the following series convergent or divergent?
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \frac{\sin \frac{2}{k}}{k^4} $$

This series may behave like $\sum \dfrac{1}{k^4}$, a convergent p-series.

We need to show that $\dfrac{\sin \frac{2}{k}}{k^4} \leq \dfrac{1}{p^4}$ for $k \geq 1$.

Since the denominators are the same, we only need to show that $\sin \frac{2}{k} \leq 1$.

```desmos-graph
left = 1; right = 10;
top = 2; bottom = -1;
---
y = \sin(2/x)
y = 1
```

Therefore, the given series converges by the Direct Comparison Test.

---

> Is the following series convergent or divergent?
> $$ \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \frac{1}{3^k - k} $$

Since $\dfrac{1}{3^k - k} \geq \dfrac{1}{3^k}$, the Direct Comparison Test is inconclusive.

---

> *Theorem 10.15: The Limit Comparison Test*
> Let $\sum a_k$ and $\sum b_k$ be series with positive terms and let
> $$ \lim_{k \to \infty} \frac{a_k}{b_k} = L. $$
> 1. If $0 < L < \infty$ (that is, $L$ is a finite positive number), then $\sum a_k$ and $\sum b_k$ either both converge or both diverge.
> 2. If $L = 0$ and $\sum b_k$ converges, then $\sum a_k$ converges.
> 3. If $L = \infty$ and $\sum b_k$ diverges, then $\sum a_k$ diverges.

- Note: pick $\sum b_k$ to be the series whose behaviour you know to make cases 2 and 3 easier

### Example

> Is the following series convergent or divergent?
> $$ \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \frac{1}{3^k - k} $$

We will compare this series to $\displaystyle \sum \left( \dfrac{1}{3} \right)^k$, which converges. Both series have positive terms.

$\displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \dfrac{\dfrac{1}{3^k - k}}{\dfrac{1}{3^k}}$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \dfrac{1}{3^k - k} \cdot 3^k$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \dfrac{3^k}{3^k - k}$
LH:
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \dfrac{3^k \ln 3}{3^k \ln 3 - 1}$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \dfrac{3^k \ln 3 \ln 3}{3^k \ln 3 \ln 3}$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} 1$
$= 1$

By the Limit Comparison Test, since $L = 1$ and $0 < L < \infty$, both series behave the same.
Thus, the given series converges.