---
tags:
  - math_172
  - series
---

> *Theorem 10.20: Ratio Test*
> Let $\sum a_k$ be an infinite series, and let $r = \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{a_{k + 1}}{a_k} \right|$.
> 1. If $r < 1$, the series converges absolutely, and therefore it converges (by Theorem 10.19).
> 2. If $r > 1$ (including $r = \infty$), the series diverges.
> 3. If $r = 1$, the test is inconclusive.

- Note: This is related to a geometric series, which converges if $|r| < 1$; the ratio test (for now) only deals with non-negative terms, so we just need $0 \leq r < 1$.

> *Example*
> According to the Ratio Test, is the following series convergent, divergent, or is the Ratio Test inconclusive?
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \dfrac{2^k}{k!} $$

- Note: $\dfrac{(k + 1)!}{k!} = \dfrac{(k + 1)(k!)}{k!} = k + 1$

Using $\displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{a_{k + 1}}{a_k} \right|$,
$=\displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{\dfrac{2^{k + 1}}{(k + 1)!}}{\dfrac{2^k}{k!}} \right|$
$=\displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{2^{k + 1}}{(k + 1)!} \cdot \dfrac{k!}{2^k} \right|$
$=\displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{2}{k + 1} \right|$
$= 0 < 1$

Therefore, by the Ratio Test, the given series converges.

> *Example*
> According to the Ratio Test, is the following series convergent, divergent, or is the Ratio Test inconclusive?
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \dfrac{4^k}{k \cdot 3^k} $$

$r = \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{\dfrac{4^{k + 1}}{(k + 1)3^{k + 1}}}{\dfrac{4^k}{k \cdot 3^k}} \right|$
$= \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{4^{k + 1}}{(k + 1)3^{k + 1}} \cdot \dfrac{k \cdot 3^k}{4^k} \right|$
$= \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{4k}{3k + 1} \right|$
$= \dfrac{4}{3} > 1$

Therefore, by the Ratio Test, the given series diverges.

> *Example*
> According to the Ratio Test, is the following series convergent, divergent, or is the Ratio Test inconclusive?
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \dfrac{2}{2k + 9} $$

$r = \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{\dfrac{2}{2(k + 1) + 9}}{\dfrac{2}{2k + 9}} \right|$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{2}{2(k + 1) + 9} \cdot \dfrac{2k + 9}{2} \right|$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{2k + 9}{2k + 11} \right|$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left| \dfrac{2k}{2k} \right|$
$= 1$

The Ratio Test is inconclusive.

- Note: The Ratio Test is always inconclusive with rational functions

> *Example*
> According to the Limit Comparison Test, is the following series convergent, divergent, or is the Limit Comparison Test inconclusive?
> $$ \sum_{k = 1}^\infty \dfrac{2}{2k + 9} $$

We will compare this series to the harmonic series $\sum \dfrac {1}{k}$, which is divergent.

$L = \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left( \dfrac{\dfrac{2}{2k + 9}}{\dfrac{1}{k}} \right)$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left( \dfrac{2}{2k + 9} \cdot \dfrac{k}{1} \right)$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left( \dfrac{2}{2k + 9} \cdot \dfrac{k}{1} \right)$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \left( \dfrac{2k}{2k + 9} \right)$
$= 1$

Since $L$ is finite and positive, and the compared series diverges, the given series also diverges by LCT.

---

> *Theorem 10.21: Root Test*
> Let $\sum a_k$ be an infinite series, and let $\rho = \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \sqrt[k]{|a_k|}$.
> 1. If $\rho < 1$, the series converges absolutely, and therefore it converges (by Theorem 10.19).
> 2. If $\rho > 1$ (including $r = \infty$), the series diverges.
> 3. If $\rho = 1$, the test is inconclusive.

> *Example*
> Is the following series convergent or divergent?
> $$ \sum_{k = 0}^\infty \left( \dfrac{5k + 3k^3}{7k^3 + 2} \right)^k $$

$\rho = \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \sqrt[k]{\left| \left( \dfrac{5k + 3k^3}{7k^3 + 2} \right)^k \right|}$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \dfrac{5k + 3k^3}{7k^3 + 2}$
$= \displaystyle \lim_{k \to \infty} \dfrac{3k^3}{7k^3}$
$= \dfrac{3}{7} < 1$

Therefore, by the Root Test, the given series converges.