---
tags:
  - math_220
created: 2024-09-03
---

## Product of a Matrix and a Column Vector

> *Definition: Product of a Matrix and a Column Vector*
> If $A$ is an $m \times n$ matrix, with columns $a_1, a_2, \dots, a_n$, and if $x$ is in $\mathbb R^n$, then the **product** of $A$ and $x$, denoted $Ax$, is the linear combination of the columns of $A$ using the corresponding entries in $x$ as weights; that is,
> $$ Ax = \begin{bmatrix} a_1 & a_2 & \dots & a_n \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} x_1 \\ \vdots \\ x_n \end{bmatrix} = x_1 a_1 + x_2 a_2 + \dots + x_n a_n $$

> *Example*
> $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 2 & -1 \\ 0 & 4 & 2 \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} 2 \\ -1 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix}$

$= \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} \cdot 2 + \begin{bmatrix} 2 \\ 4 \end{bmatrix} \cdot -1 + \begin{bmatrix} -1 \\ 2 \end{bmatrix} \cdot 1$

$= \begin{bmatrix} 2 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix} -2 \\ -4 \end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix} -1 \\ 2 \end{bmatrix}$

$= \begin{bmatrix} -1 \\ -2 \end{bmatrix}$

Note: Matrix multiplication is always in the form $[m \times n] \times [n \times p] \rightarrow [m \times p]$.

Identity matrix: $\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 0 & \dots & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & \dots & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 1 & \dots & 0 \\ \vdots & \vdots & \vdots & \ddots & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & 1 \end{bmatrix}$

## The Matrix Equation

> *Definition: The Matrix Equation*
> An equation of the form $Ax = b$ is called a matrix equation.
> Where:
> $A$ = Coefficient matrix
> $x$ = Column vector of variables
> $b$ = Column vector of constants

Note: We can use this to rewrite systems of equations as matrix equations.

> *Example*
> $3x_1 - 2x_2 + x_3 = -9$
> $x_1 - 5x_3 = -1$
> $2x_1 + 2x_2 + 3x_3 = 4$

Can be rewritten as:

$\begin{bmatrix} 3 & -2 & 1 \\ 1 & 0 & -5 \\ 2 & 2 & 3 \end{bmatrix} \begin{bmatrix} x_1 \\ x_2 \\ x_3 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} -9 \\ -1 \\ 4 \end{bmatrix}$

> *Theorem*
> If $A$ is an $m \times n$ matrix, with columns $a_1, \dots, a_n$, and if $b$ is in $\mathbb R^m$, then the matrix equation
> $$ Ax = b $$
> has the same solution set as the vector equation
> $$ x_1 a_1 + x_2 a_2 + \dots + x_n a_n = b $$
> which, in turn, has the same solution set as the system of linear equations whose augmented matrix is
> $$ \begin{bmatrix} a_1 & a_2 & \dots & a_n & | & b \end{bmatrix}. $$

Later, we will test if *all* $b$ satisfies an equation.
- Need to generalise $b = \begin{bmatrix} b_1 \\ \vdots \\ b_m \end{bmatrix}$, then solve.

> *Example*
> Let $A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & 3 & 4 \\ -2 & 2 & -2 \\ -3 & 7 & 0 \end{bmatrix}$ and $b = \begin{bmatrix} b_1 \\ b_2 \\ b_3 \end{bmatrix}$. Is the equation $Ax = b$ consistent for all possible $b_1, b_2, b_3$?

$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 3 & 4 & | & b_1 \\ -2 & 2 & -2 & | & b_2 \\ -3 & 7 & 0 & | & b_3 \end{bmatrix}$

R2 + 2R1 -> R2
R3 + 3R1 -> R3

$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 3 & 4 & | & b_1 \\ 0 & 8 & 6 & | & b_2 + 2b_1 \\ 0 & 16 & 12 & | & b_3 + 3b_1 \end{bmatrix}$

R3 - 2R2 -> R3

$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 3 & 4 & | & b_1 \\ 0 & 8 & 6 & | & b_2 + 2b_1 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & | & b_3 - 2b_2 - b_1 \end{bmatrix}$

This means $0 = b_3 - 2b_2 - b_1$. Therefore, the equation is *not* consistent for all possible $b_1, b_2, b_3$.

This also means that the original three vectors are **co-planar**.
Equivalently, one of the vectors is a [[1.3 Vector Equations#Linear Combination|linear combination]] of the other two.

Note: If we had two zero-rows, then the three vectors would be **co-linear**.

---

> *Theorem*
> Let $A$ be an $m \times n$ matrix. Then the following statements are logically equivalent. That is, for a particular $A$, either they are all true statements or they are all false statements.
> 1. For each $b$ in $\mathbb R^m$, the equation $A_x = b$ has a solution.
> 2. Each $b$ in $\mathbb R^m$ is a linear combination of the columns of $A$.
> 3. The columns of $A$ [[1.3 Vector Equations#Span|span]] $\mathbb R^m$.
> 4. $A$ has a pivot position in every row (in the coefficient matrix).

> *Theorem*
> If $A$ is an $m \times n$ matrix, $u$ and $v$ are vectors in $\mathbb R^n$, and $c$ is a scalar, then:
> 1. $A(u + v) = Au + Av$
> 2. $A(cu) = c(Au)$