---
tags:
  - math_220
created: 2024-09-05
---

## Homogeneous Systems

> *Definition: Homogeneous*

A system of linear equations is said to be homogeneous if it can be written in the form $A \vec x = \vec 0$, where $A$ is an $m \times n$ matrix and $\vec 0$ is the zero vector in $\mathbb R^m$.

$\vec x = \begin{bmatrix} 0 \\ \vdots \\ 0 \end{bmatrix}$ will always be consistent, so our question is, *are there infinite solutions?*

---

> *Example*
> Determine if the homogeneous system has a nontrivial solution.
> $$ 3x_1 + 5x_2 - 4x_3 = 0 $$
> $$ -3x_1 - 2x_2 + 4x_3 = 0 $$
> $$ 6x_1 + x_2 - 8x_3 = 0 $$

$\begin{bmatrix} 3 & 5 & -4 & | & 0 \\ -3 & -2 & 4 & | & 0 \\ 6 & 1 & -8 & | & 0 \end{bmatrix}$

After row reductions:
$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & -\frac{4}{3} & | & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & | & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & | & 0 \end{bmatrix}$

$x_3$ is a free variable.
Therefore,
$\vec x = \begin{bmatrix} x_1 \\ x_2 \\ x_3 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} \frac{4}{3} x_3 \\ 0 \\ x_3 \end{bmatrix} = x_3 \begin{bmatrix} \frac{4}{3} \\ 0 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix}$

Or, if we assign the general-solution vector to $\vec v$,
$\vec x = x_3 \vec v$

> *Example*
> Is the system homogeneous? If so, does it have a nontrivial solution?
> $$ x_1 + 3x_2 - 5x_3 = 0 $$

$\vec x = \begin{bmatrix} x_1 \\ x_2 \\ x_3 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} -3x_2 + 5x_3 \\ x_2 \\ x_3 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} -3x_2 \\ x_2 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix} 5x_3 \\ 0 \\ x_3 \end{bmatrix}$

$= x_2 \begin{bmatrix} -3 \\ 1 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} + x_3 \begin{bmatrix} 5 \\ 0 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix} = x_2 \vec u + x_3 \vec v$

This is the [[1.3 Vector Equations#Span|span]] of the solution space.

This also allows parametric descriptions of the solution space:
$x = s \vec u + t \vec v$

---

## Non-homogeneous Systems

> *Example*
> Describe all solutions of $A \vec x = \vec b$, where
> $$ A = \begin{bmatrix} 3 & 5 & -4 \\ -3 & -2 & 4 \\ 6 & 1 & -8 \end{bmatrix} \text{ and } b = \begin{bmatrix} 7 \\ -1 \\ -4 \end{bmatrix}. $$

After row reductions:
$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & -\frac{4}{3} & | & 1 \\ 0 & 1 & 0 & | & 2 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & | & 0 \end{bmatrix}$

$\vec x = \begin{bmatrix} x_1 \\ x_2 \\ x_3 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} 1 + \frac{4}{3} x_3 \\ 2 \\ x_3 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} 1 \\ 2 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} + x_3 \begin{bmatrix} \frac{4}{3} \\ 0 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix}$

$\vec x = \vec p + t \vec v$

We are simply adding a vector $\vec p$, which **translates** the solution space.

---

> *Theorem*
> Suppose the equation $A \vec x = \vec b$ is consistent for some given $\vec b$, and let $\vec p$ be a solution. Then the solution set of $A \vec x = \vec b$ is the set of all vectors of the form $\vec w = \vec p + \vec v_b$, where $\vec v_b$ is any solution of the homogeneous equation $A \vec x = \vec 0$.

Guide for writing a solution set in parametric vector form:
1. Row reduce the augmented matrix to reduced echelon form.
2. Express each basic variable in terms of any free variables appearing in an equation.
3. Write a typical solution $\vec x$ as a vector whose entries depend on the free variables, if any.
4. Decompose $\vec x$ into a linear combination of vectors using the free variables as parameters.

> *Example*
> Find all nontrivial solutions of $A \vec x = \vec 0$ where
> $$ A = \begin{bmatrix} 1 & -2 & 1 & 2 \\ 1 & -1 & 2 & 5 \\ 0 & 1 & 1 & 3 \end{bmatrix}. $$

After row reductions:
$\begin{bmatrix} 1 & 0 & 3 & 8 & | & 0 \\ 0 & 1 & 1 & 3 & | & 0 \\ 0 & 0 & 0 & 0 & | & 0 \end{bmatrix}$

$x_1 = -3x_3 - 8x_4$
$x_2 = -x_3 - 3x_4$

$\vec x = \begin{bmatrix} x_1 \\ x_2 \\ x_3 \\ x_4 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} -3x_3 - 8x_4 \\ -x_3 - 3x_4 \\ x_3 \\ x_4 \end{bmatrix} = \begin{bmatrix} -3x_3 \\ -x_3 \\ x_3 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} + \begin{bmatrix} -8x_4 \\ -3x_4 \\ 0 \\ x_4 \end{bmatrix}$

$= x_3 \begin{bmatrix} -3 \\ -1 \\ 1 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix} + x_4 \begin{bmatrix} -8 \\ -3 \\ 0 \\ 1 \end{bmatrix}$

$= s \vec u + t \vec v$